## **1. Graph Coloring - Greedy Algorithm**

Time Complexity: O(V^2 + E) in worst case.

Analysis of Basic Algorithm 

The algorithm doesn’t always use minimum number of colors. Also, the number of colors used sometime depend on the order in which vertices are processed. 

So the order in which the vertices are picked is important. Many people have suggested different ways to find an ordering that work better than the basic algorithm on average. The most common is Welsh–Powell Algorithm which considers vertices in descending order of degrees. 

### **How does the basic algorithm guarantee an upper bound of d+1? **

Here d is the maximum degree in the given graph. Since d is maximum degree, a vertex cannot be attached to more than d vertices. When we color a vertex, at most d colors could have already been used by its adjacent. To color this vertex, we need to pick the smallest numbered color that is not used by the adjacent vertices. If colors are numbered like 1, 2, …., then the value of such smallest number must be between 1 to d+1 (Note that d numbers are already picked by adjacent vertices). 
This can also be proved using induction. See this video lecture for proof. 
We will soon be discussing some interesting facts about chromatic number and graph coloring.


*https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/graph-coloring-set-2-greedy-algorithm/*

## **2. DSatur Algorithm for Graph Coloring**

The DSatur algorithm (abbreviated from “degree of saturation”) has similar behaviour to the Greedy algorithm. The difference lies in the way that it generates the vertex ordering. Specifically, the next vertex to colour is always chosen as the uncoloured vertex with the highest saturation degree. The saturation degree of a vertex is defined as the number of different colours currently assigned to neighbouring vertices. Other rules are also then used to break ties. 

Let G be a graph with n vertices and m edges. In addition, assume that we will use the colour labels 0, 1, 2, …, n-1. (More than n colours are never required in a solution). The DSatur algorithm operates as follows

> 1. Let v be the uncoloured vertex in G with the largest saturation degree. In cases of ties, choose the vertex among these with the largest degree in the subgraph induced by the uncoloured vertices. Further ties can be broken arbitrarily.
> 2. Assign v to colour i, where i is the smallest integer from the set {0, 1, 2, …, n} that is not currently assigned to any neighbour of v.
> 3. If there remain uncoloured vertices, repeat all steps again, otherwise, end at this step.

The DSatur algorithm is similar to the Greedy algorithm in that once a vertex has been selected, it is assigned to the lowest colour label not assigned to any of its neighbours. The actions of Step 1, therefore, provide the main power behind the algorithm in that they prioritise vertices that are seen to be the “most constrained” – that is, vertices that currently have the fewest colour options available to them. Consequently, these “more constrained” vertices are dealt with first, allowing the less constrained vertices to be coloured later.


*https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/dsatur-algorithm-for-graph-coloring/?ref=rp*


## **Another vertex-ordering algorithm : WELSH-POWELL ALGORITHM**

*http://mrsleblancsmath.pbworks.com/w/file/fetch/46119304/vertex%20coloring%20algorithm.pdf*


## **Questions**